In the last lecture we installed vuelidate,
let's now use it.
First of all, I'm going to restart npm run dev to bring my development server back up
and let's now understand how we use this vuelidate package.
We'll start with a simple validation,
let's say we want to ensure that our e-mail address here is not empty and that it's also a valid email
address,
this is a very common validation of course,
so it makes up for a great example.
So we're talking about this input here, this input with the ID email which is of type email and bound
to this e-mail property
in my vue instance in my vue component here. Now we first of all need to unlock the vuelidate package
and for that, I'll go to my main.js file where we start the application and I will import vuelidate
from vuelidate here,
so from this package we just installed. As a next step after all these imports,
I then will use my vue package itself with the use method to use this vuelidate package and
this is how you'll inject or add a lot of third party packages into vue.
With that, we can now use vuelidate features in our vue components and instances and I want to use
such a feature in the signup.vue file, this signup component.
Now that we use vuelidate, we can add a special property to the component,
so next to data, methods, computed and so on, we can now add validations. This otherwise would have been
an unknown property, vue by default doesn't know this one
but thanks to vuelidate, it now does.
And now in validations, you can set up the validations you want to use in your form, for that,
you use some keys to identify your form controls.
Now here that's important,
this has to be named email,
it has to have the same name as the property you are binding to
with v-model, that's required by vuelidate so that it can automatically synchronize this and knows
when the value changes,
so if you name the value in your data method which you return there email, if you name the property e-mail
there I mean, then you have to name this property in the validations object here also e-mail.
So I'll use e-mail and this standalone of course won't do anything,
email now takes a javascript object where we configure the validators we want to register for this
control and for that I want to import some validators because the vuelidate package, whilst allowing us
to create our own validators, also ships with a lot of very common ones.
So I simply have to import them into my component file here and I'll import them from vuelidate/lib
/validators, from this package
I can now install or import a couple of built-in validators, a full list of built-in validators can be
found on the vuelidate documentation page,
If you scroll down to built-in validators. I'm interested in two validators here, the required validator
which simply checks if the field is not empty and the email validator which checks if it's a valid email
address. With these two built-in validators
imported, I can now assign them to my email control here and I do this by simply adding them as properties
so I can add a required property here
and I bind it to required,
so to this required I import and I can also set my email property and bind it to email.
Now it's actually up to you
what you name
these first parameters, you could have used req and mail here
but a typical pattern is to use the validator names here because that then allows you to take advantage
of a next generation javascript feature where you can omit the value because if the key name is equal
to the value,
it will automatically expand it into this key value pair.
So now this is the same syntax as before or has the same result, we assigned required to required and
email to email but it's a bit shorter.
Now with that, these two validators are registered for this email
and with that, we can now connect this e-mail validation rule we set up here in our javascript code to our
template because that is something we haven't done yet.
This alone, what we did thus far wouldn't do anything,
how would vuelidate know to which input in our html code
it should connect this.
You could argue that since we named this email here, it should pick an input with the ID email but that would
be really arbitrarily because it would really force us to use the same naming everywhere
and it doesn't make this assumption,
we manually have to connect it and connecting it is super super simple. To connect it,
besides registering v-model here, we also register the input event.
Now the input event is part of what v-model listens to but we can also register it standalone next to
it. Now in here, we can access the special $v property and that is a reserved word,
$v
is exposed by the vuelidate package,
just like you have $event as a reserved name for the incoming event data.
So $v gives us access to the validators, to the validation rules and all the behind the scenes
validation vuelidate does. On $v, we can now access any validation rule or control to
be precise
we set up. If we stroll down to our javascript code in validations, that's only one, email, so we can access
email on $v,
so let's access email. And now on this, we can call a method which is dollar sign,
don't forget this,
$touch, make sure to execute it.
Now $touch is a method which is automatically exposed and added by the vuelidate package,
so we just target our email control,
we can then execute $touch and this will inform vuelidate that it should check if the
input on which we registered this code with the input event, if that fulfills the requirements of the
email validation rule which is that we should have required input so that it should be non-empty and
that it should be an email.
Now how can we find out if that actually is the case,
if that actually works?
Well let's simply try by temporarily outputting something below the input,
I'll add a div below the input and in there, I'll simply output $v and let's see what's
inside of this object.
Now let's save this,
let's go back to our application and in there, you now see this object below the input,
that is what $v holds.
Now it's a bit hard to read but what you see is that here indeed, we got this email property which is
only present because we added such a validation rule, you see that required is false which means this
validator is not met,
it's empty, email actually is true but that simply is the starting value for this validator, it will quickly
change once we start typing
and now if I do type a T here, which is not a valid email address, you see the required
now is true because we meet the criteria of having some value in there but email is false because
obviously, this is not a valid email address. And we get some other utility properties exposed by vuelidate,
like this $invalid property which is true because it is invalid, $dirty which
means yeah, we did touch it,
so we had a chance to edit it, $error which is true which means we have an error, it's not
equal to invalid, error will actually only be true if dirty and invalid are true,
so if we had a chance to touch it because that allows us to provide a better user experience by not
marking this as false just because it's invalid, it's always invalid at the start,
error also means that we had a chance to correct it. Pending means if we're currently evaluating the
validity of this,
this is more important for asynchronous validators
and then here we see params which also lists the validators we assigned, required which then simply is what
this validator returns us and we'll dive deeper into this once we write our own validators. And then again
we got invalid, dirty and error for the overall form,
so not just for this e-mail but for all validators we registered, here it is of course only one
but if we had more validation rules, this would give us information about whether they all together are
invalid or not.
Now enough talking about this, if I complete this to a real email address, you see now we pass required,
we pass the e-mail therefore invalid is false and error is false and we would have a valid input.
This is how validation works,
now outputting the information like this below the input probably is not the best possible user experience.
So let's find out how we can take advantage of the information we got here
to style our input differently and possibly show a warning message.